But we have to give some love up for Bruce Springsteen. I mean, gosh.  For months, I have heard his songs played at our rallies. But I have to say, there's nothing like seeing The Boss in person.  Nothing like it. He has just been tremendous. He and his family and his team, they've just been amazing. So we want to thank Bruce for everything that he's done for us.

And more than anything else, I want to thank you all for being here tonight. I mean, as you know this is a pretty emotional time for us, because this is the final event of my husband's final campaign.  So this is the last time that he and I will be onstage together at a campaign rally. And that's why we wanted to come here to Iowa tonight because truly this is where it all began, right here.

And I have so many fond memories of this state the house parties in Sioux City and Cedar Rapids; celebrating Malia's birthday in Pella; and seeing my husband's face carved in butter.  Believe me, we still talk about that at Christmas. 

But I will never forget the kindness and warmth and love that you all showed me and my family, especially our girls. That is truly what made the difference back in those early days when I wasn't so sure about this whole process; back when I was still wondering what it would mean for our girls and our family if Barack got the chance to serve as President.

But the truth is while I had my worries and my fears, I also realized that this decision affected not only me as a wife and a mother, but as a voter, as an American. And I started envisioning the kind of person that I wanted to lead our country. And I knew that I wanted a President with a steady character, with deep compassion and strong convictions. I wanted a President who was smart.  I wanted someone we could trust someone who would always, always tell us the truth even when it's hard.  And I wanted a President driven not by politics or which way the wind is blowing, but by the struggles, hopes and dreams of all Americans. 

And the more I thought about it, the more I knew in my heart that I was describing Barack. I knew he could be that President. And for four years, that's exactly what he's done. He has stayed true to himself, and with your help, he's worked day after day to make this country better, to move it forward. He's rescued our economy from the brink of collapse and saved the auto industry.  He's passed historic health reform ended the war in Iraq.  He's
fought so women get equal pay and students can afford college.  He's fought for our seniors, so that they can retire with dignit;, and our veterans, so that they can give the benefits they earned and the respect they deserve. 

For four years, Barack has been fighting to give every single one of us a fair shot at that great American Dream, no matter what we look like or where we come from or who we love.  And for four years, we have all seen what I've seen for the past 23 years. We've seen a man of honor and integrity who knows what he believes and stays true to his values.  I'm so proud of my husband. We have seen an honest man who knows the facts and always gives it to us straight.
We've seen a man whose strength and resolve to build a better tomorrow has never wavered, never.

And that's why I am so thrilled to be here in Iowa tonight because long before most people even knew his name, you all saw what I saw. So you did all this crazy stuff. You showed up at campaign offices here in Des Moines and offices all over the state. More importantly, you opened your homes. You held caucus trainings. You marched with us at the Jefferson-Jackson dinner.  And then, on a cold January night, you stood up for Barack, because you knew that he would
stand up for you. 

And over these past four years, our family has been truly blessed truly blessed by all of the love and support and prayers that we have received from every corner of this country. And Barack has been truly blessed to have all of you by his side as we have worked together to bring that change we can believe in.

It is an honor and a privilege to serve this nation just know that. And tomorrow, we get the chance to finish what we started here in Iowa.  Tomorrow, all across this state, all across this country, we will line up and vote in libraries and community centers, in school gyms. We're going to knock on doors until our fingers are numb. We're going to make calls until our voices are hoarse.  And we won't stop until every voice and every last vote is counted.


And we will do it. We will do it, because while we have come so far, we know that there is so much more to do. And what we really, truly know is that we cannot turn back now. We need to keep moving this country forward. 

So that means that we need to reelect the man who has been fighting for us every single day my husband, the love of my life the President of the United States Barack Obama. 

 Hello, Iowa!  Tomorrow. Tomorrow, Iowa. Tomorrow, from the granite of New Hampshire to the Rockies of Colorado, from the coastlines of Florida to Virginia's rolling hills, from the valleys of Ohio to these Iowa fields we will keep America moving forward. 

I've come back to Iowa one more time to ask for your vote.  I came back to ask you to help us finish what we've started.  Because this is where our movement for change began.  Right here. Right here.

Right behind these bleachers is the building that was home to our Iowa headquarters in 2008.  I was just inside, and it brought back a whole lot of memories. This was where some of the first young people who joined our campaign set up shop, willing to work for little pay and less sleep because they believed that people who love their country can change it.

This was where so many of you who shared that belief came to help. When the heat didn't work for the first week or so some of you brought hats and gloves for the staff. These poor kids, they weren't prepared.  When the walls inside were bare, one of you painted a mural to lift everybody's spirits. When we had a Steak Fry to march to, when we had a J-J Dinner to fire up you brought your neighbors and you made homemade signs. When we had calls to
make, teachers and nurses showed up after work, already bone-tired, but staying anyway, late into the night.

And you welcomed me and Michelle into your homes. And you picked us up when we needed a lift. And your faces gave me new hope for this country's future, and your stories filled me with resolve to fight for you every single day I set foot in the Oval Office. 

You inspired us. And I want to take this opportunity to say one thing to all the young people and not-so-young people who've given so much to this campaign over the years those of you who haven't done this just for me, but for each other for a laid-off family member, for a sick child, for a fallen friend to all of you who've lived and breathed the hard work of change: I want to thank you.

You took this campaign and you made it your own. And you organized yourselves, block by block, neighborhood by neighborhood, county by county, starting a movement that spread across the country a movement made up of young and old, and rich and poor, and black and white, Latino, Asian, Native American, gay, straight, Democrats, Republicans, who believe we've all got something to contribute; that we all deserve a shot at our own American Dream. 

And when the cynics said we couldn't, you said "Yes, we can."


You said, "Yes, we can" and we did. Against all odds, we did. We didn't know what challenges would come when we began this journey. We didn't know how deep the crisis would turn out. But we knew we would get through those challenges the same way this nation always has with that determined, unconquerable American spirit that says no matter how bad the storm gets, no matter how tough times are, we're all in this together. We rise or fall as one nation and as one
people. 

That's the spirit that's carried us through the trials and tribulations of the last four years. In 2008, we were in the middle of two wars and the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression. And today, our businesses have created nearly five and a half million new jobs.  The American auto industry is back. Home values are on the rise. We're less dependent on foreign oil than any time in the last 20 years. We've doubled the production of clean energy. Because of the
service and sacrifice of our brave men and women in uniform, the war in Iraq is over. The war in Afghanistan is ending. Al Qaeda is on the run. Osama bin Laden is dead. 

We've made real progress these past four years. But, Iowa, we're here tonight because we've got more work to do. We're not done yet on this journey. We've got more road to travel. As long as there's a single American who wants a job but can't find one; as long as there are families working harder but still falling behind; as long as there's a child anywhere in Des Moines, anywhere in Iowa, anywhere in this country languishing in poverty, barred from opportunity our work isn't done.
 Our fight for change goes on.

Because we know this nation cannot succeed without a growing, thriving middle class and sturdy ladders for everybody who is willing to work to get into that middle class.  Our fight goes on because America has always done best when everybody has got a fair shot, and everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody plays by the same rules. The people of Iowa understand that. That's what we believe. That's why you elected me in 2008. And, Iowa, that's why I'm running for a
second term as President of the United States. 

 Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!

 Now, the choice you make tomorrow and you understand this; Iowans, you guys pay attention the choice you make is not just between two candidates or parties. It's a choice between two different visions of America who we are; what we believe; what we care about. It's a choice between going back to the top-down policies that caused the mess we've been fighting our way out of for four years or moving forward to a future
that's built on a strong and growing middle class.

And, Iowa, you know me as well as anybody. You've seen a lot of me these last six years.  And you know what, you may not agree with every decision I've made Michelle doesn't.  There may be times where you've been frustrated at the pace of change. I promise you, so have I. But I tell you what, you know what I believe. You know where I stand. You know I tell the truth.  You know I'll fight for you and your families every single day, as hard as I
know how. 

And that's why, when we talk about change, we know what real change looks like because we've fought for it. We've got the scars to prove it. I've got the gray hair to show it.  I wasn't this gray when I first showed up in Iowa.  And sometimes it's been hard. Sometimes it's been frustrating. We understand that. But what we also know is that when we decide to make a difference, when Americans come together, determined to bring about change, nobody can stop us. We
cannot be stopped.

And after all we've been through together, after all that we fought through together, we cannot give up on change now. 

We know what real change looks like. Change is a country where every American has a shot at a great education where we recruit new teachers, train new workers, bring down tuition, so that no one in this country is forced to give up the dream of a college education. 

Change comes when we live up to this country's legacy of innovation by investing in the next generation of technology and manufacturing. Instead of subsidizing oil company profits, I want to support energy jobs of tomorrow. And Iowa knows about clean energy and biodiesel and wind turbines that will free this country from the grip of foreign oil. 

I don't want a tax code that rewards companies for creating jobs overseas; I want to reward companies that create jobs right here in America. That's what change is, Iowa. 

Change is turning the page on a decade of war so we can do some nation-building here at home repairing our roads and our bridges, making our schools state of the art; putting our veterans back to work because nobody who fights for this country's freedom should have to fight for a job, or a roof over their heads when they come home.  That's what we're fighting for. That's why we're not done. 

Change is a future where we reduce our deficit by asking the wealthiest Americans to go back to the tax rates they paid when Bill Clinton was in office.  We'll cut out spending we don't need. But as long as I'm President, we're not going to turn Medicare into a voucher just to pay for another millionaire's tax cut.  We're not going to kick a kid off of Head Start just to pay for a millionaire's tax cut. 

Because our budget reflects our priorities and our values. And we know what our future requires. We know what real change is. You helped teach me that, here in Iowa.  And what we also know is that change isn't easy. Remember, a lot of you showed up to town hall meetings back in 2007, 2008, and I used to talk about change. But I also said I'm not just talking about changing presidents. I'm not just talking about changing parties. I'm talking about changing our politics.
 
I told you I ran because your voices had been shut out of our democracy for way too long by special interests and politicians who will do whatever it takes to keep things just the way they are. And we've seen over the last four years, the status quo in Washington, they are powerful and they have fought us every step of the way.

When we tried and succeeded in reforming our health care system, they spent millions trying to stop us. When we tried and succeeded in reforming Wall Street, they spent millions to push us back. And we kept on going. But those were tough fights.

And what the protectors of the status quo in Washington are counting on now is that you'll get worn down by all the squabbling. You'll get fed up with the dysfunction. You'll give up on the change we've fought for. You'll walk away and leave them to make decisions that affect every American. In other words, their bet is on cynicism. But, Iowa, you taught me to bet on you.  You taught me to bet on hope.  
I'll work with anybody, of any party, to move this country forward. And if you want to break the gridlock in Congress, you'll vote for leaders who feel the same way whether they're Democrats, or Republicans, or independents the kind of Iowa leaders you've always had and Christie Vilsack, and Tom Harkin, and Leonard Boswell and Bruce Braley, and my great friends, Tom Miller and Mike Fitzgerald. 

But there's some principles you got to fight for. There are times where you've got to take a stand. If the price of peace in Washington is cutting deals to kick students off of financial aid, or get rid of funding for Planned Parenthood, or let insurance companies discriminate against kids with preexisting conditions, or eliminate health care for millions on Medicaid who are poor, or elderly, or disabled I won't pay that price. That's not a deal I will make.  That's not
bipartisanship. That's not change. That's surrender to the same forces of the status quo that has squeezed middle-class families for way too long.

And, Iowa, I'm not ready to give up on the fight.  I've got a lot more fight left in me.  But to wage that fight on behalf of American families, I need you to still have some fight in you, too. 

The folks at the top in this country, it turns out they don't need another champion in Washington. They'll always have a seat at the table. They'll always have access and influence. The people who need a champion are the Americans whose letters I read late at night after a long day in the office; the men and women I meet on the campaign trail every day.

The laid-off furniture worker who's retraining at the age of 55 for a new career at a community college she needs a champion. The restaurant owner who needs a loan to expand he's got great food but the bank turned him down he needs help. He needs a champion. The cooks and the waiters and cleaning staff, working overtime in a hotel in Des Moines or Vegas, trying to save enough to buy a first home or send their kid to college they need a champion. 

The autoworker who was laid off, thought the plant would never reopen, and is now back on the job, filled with pride and dignity, building a great car, building America he needs a champion.  The teacher in an overcrowded classroom with outdated schoolbooks, digging into her own pocket to buy school supplies, not always feeling like she's got the support she needs, but showing up every day because she knows that this might be the day that she's got a breakthrough and
she makes a difference in one child's life she needs a champion. 

All those kids in inner cities, small farm towns kids dreaming of becoming scientists or doctors, engineers or entrepreneurs, diplomats or even a President they need a champion in Washington, because the future will never have as many lobbyists as the status quo children don't have lobbyists the way oil companies or banks do. But it's the dreams of those children that will be our saving grace.

That's what we fight for. That's why I need you, Iowa. To make sure their voices are heard. To make sure your voices are heard.  And that's why we've come too far to turn back now. We've come too far to let our hearts grow faint. Now is the time to keep pushing forward to educate all our kids, and train all our workers, and to create new jobs, and rebuild our roads, and bring back our troops, and care for our veterans, and broaden opportunity, and
grow our middle class, and restore our democracy and make sure that no matter who you are, or where you come from, or how you started out, what you look like, who you love, what your last name is, here in America, you can make it if you try. That's what we're fighting for. 

And, Iowa, after all the months of campaigning, after all the rallies, after the millions of dollars of ads, it all comes down to you. It's out of my hands now. It's in yours. All of it depends on what you do when you step into that voting booth tomorrow. It's just a remarkable thing, the way our democracy works. And at a certain point, all this effort and all these campaign rallies and then it just comes down to each of us, as citizens. All of it depends on you bringing your friend,
or your neighbor, your coworker, your mom, your dad, your wife, your husband to the polls.

That's how our democracy is supposed to be. The single most powerful force in our democracy is you. Moving this country forward begins with you.  Don't ever let anybody tell you your voice doesn't matter. Don't let anybody tell you your voice can't make a difference. It makes a difference.

I got a powerful reminder of this myself on our last campaign. Folks in Iowa, I know you may have heard this story but it was early in the primaries, and we were still way down in the polls. I think this office had just finally gotten the heat turned on.  And at the time, I was still competing in South Carolina it was one of the early primary states. And I really wanted the endorsement of a state representative down there. I met her at some function where nobody knew me, nobody
could pronounce my name. They're wondering, what's he thinking? 

So I asked her for her endorsement. And she said, "I tell you what, Obama I will give you my endorsement if you come to my hometown of Greenwood, South Carolina." And I think I had a little bit of wine during dinner, because right away I said "okay." 

So it's about a month later, and I'm traveling back to South Carolina. And we flew in late I think we were coming from Iowa. We had been campaigning non-stop, traveling all through towns and having town hall meetings and shaking hands. And in between, I'm making phone calls, asking people for support. And so we land in Greenwood, South Carolina, at around midnight. We get to the hotel about 1 o'clock in the morning. I am wiped out. I'm exhausted. And I'm dragging my bags to my room.
Back then we didn't fly on Air Force One.  And the accommodations were a little different. 

And just as I'm about to walk into the room, one of my staf taps me on the shoulder to say, "Excuse me, Senator" I was a senator back then. "We're going to have to wake up and be on the road at 6:30 a.m. in the morning." And I said, "What?"  "Why?" "Well, you made this promise to go to Greenwood, and it's several hours away." 

And you know, Iowa, I try to keep my promises. So a few hours later, I wake up and I'm feeling terrible. I think a cold is coming on. And I open up the curtains to try to get some light to wake me up, but it's pouring down rain. Terrible storm. And I take a shower and get some coffee, and I open up the newspaper and there's a bad story about me in The New York Times.  I was much more sensitive at that time to bad stories.  I've become more accustomed to these now.

And finally I get dressed, I go downstairs and I'm walking out to the car, and my umbrella blows open and I'm soaked. So by the time I'm in the car I'm wet and I'm mad and I'm still kind of sleepy. And it turns out that Greenwood is several hours away from everyplace else. 

And so we drive, and we drive, and we drive, and we drive. And finally we get to Greenwood although you don't know you're in Greenwood right away because there are not a lot of tall buildings around. And we pull up to a small field house, and I walked in, and I'm looking around. I don't hear a lot going on. And the state representative said she was going to organize a little meeting for us, and we walked in and there are about 20 people there. And they're all kind of wet, too, and
they don't look very excited to see me. 

But I'm running for President, so I do what I'm supposed to do and I'm shaking hands, I say, "How do you do? Nice to meet you." And I'm making my way around the room, and suddenly I hear this voice cry out behind me: "Fired up."

 Ready to go!

 And I'm startled, and I don't know what's going on. But everybody in the room this is a small room they act like this is normal.  And when the voice says, "Fired up," they all say, "Ready to go."

And so once again, I hear the voice: "Fired up." They say, "Fired up." They say, "Ready to go!" "Ready to go!"

I look around, I turned behind me there's this small woman. She's about 60 years old; looks like she just came from church she got a big church hat.  And she's looking at me, kind of peering at me, and she's grinning, smiling, looking happy. Turns out she's a city councilwoman from Greenwood who also moonlights as a private detective. I'm not making this up.  This is true. And it turns out she's famous throughout the area. When she goes to football games and
when she goes to rallies and she goes to community events, she does this chant of hers. She does it wherever she goes. So for the next few minutes, she just keeps on saying "Fired up."

 Ready to go!

 And everybody says "Fired up," and she says she's "Ready to go," and everybody else says "Ready to go."

And I'm thinking, this woman is showing me up.  This is my meeting. I'm running for President.  And she's dominating the room. And I look at my staff, and they just shrug their shoulders. They don't know what to do.

So this goes on for a few minutes. Now, here's the thing, Iowa. After a few minutes, I'm feeling kind of fired up.  I'm feeling like I'm ready to go.  So I start joining in the chant, and my staff starts joining in the chant. And somehow I feel pretty good.

And we go on to talk about the lives of the people in the room, and their families and their struggles and their hopes for their kids and their grandkids. And we drive out and it's still raining, but it doesn't seem so bad. And we go to our next stop, and for the rest of the day, even after we left Greenwood, even though we still weren't getting any big crowds anyplace, even though people still couldn't pronounce my name, I felt good. 

And I'd see my staff, and I'd say, "Are you fired up?" They'd say, "We're fired up." I'd say, "Are you ready to go?" And they'd say, "We're ready to go." 

And we brought that to Iowa. And during our rallies, this became a chant, and we'd have signs saying "Fired up, Ready to go." And the woman, her name was Edith Childs she became a celebrity, and she was written up in The Wall Street Journal and folks did news stories on her. And this became one of the anthems of our campaign back in 2008.

Now, here's the end of the story, though. We knew we were coming back to Des Moines for the last campaign rally I'll ever do for me. And so we were getting kind of sentimental. And we called up Edith Childs. And we said, why don't you come on up?  No, no, listen to this. We said, why don't you come on up; we'll fly you up from South Carolina and you can do this chant one more time, just for old good-time sake. It's like getting the band back together again. 

And you know what Edith said? She said, I'd love to see you, but I think we can still win North Carolina, so I'm taking a crew into North Carolina to knock on doors on Election Day I don't have time just to be talking about it.  I've got to knock on some doors.  I've got to turn out the vote.  I'm still fired up, but I've got work to do. 

And that shows you what one voice can do. One voice can change a room. And if it can change a room, it can change a city. And if it can change a city, it can change a state. And if it can change a state, it can change a nation.  And if it can change a nation, it can change the world. 

And, Iowa, in 2008, your voice changed the world. And Edith Childs asked me to ask you that if you're willing to still stand with me tomorrow, if you're willing to get your friends and your neighbors and your coworkers to the polls tomorrow, if you're willing to make sure we finish what we started, she's pretty sure we'll win Iowa.  She's pretty sure we'll win this election.  And she just had one question for you, and that is: Are you fired up?
Thank you. Thank you.  Thank you so much. Thank you.  Everyone, please take your seats otherwise Clint Eastwood will yell at them. 

Thank you to Al and Ann. To Your Eminence; Governor, Mrs. Romney; Governor Cuomo; Mayor Bloomberg; Senator Schumer; all the distinguished guests who are here.

In less than three weeks, voters in states like Ohio and Virginia and Florida will decide this incredibly important election which begs the question, what are we doing here? 

Of course, New Yorkers also have a big choice to make you have to decide which one of us you want holding up traffic for the next four years. 

Tonight I am here with a man whose father was a popular governor, and who knows what it's like to run a major Northeastern state, and who could very well be president someday and I'm hoping it is Andrew Cuomo. 

This is the third time that Governor Romney and I have met recently. As some of you may have noticed, I had a lot more energy at our second debate.  I felt really well rested after the nice, long nap I had in the first debate.  Although it turns out millions of Americans focused in on the second debate who didn't focus in on the first debate and I happen to be one of them. 

I particularly want to apologize to Chris Matthews.  Four years ago, I gave him a thrill up his leg this time around I gave him a stroke. 

And of course, there's a lot of things I learned from that experience. For example, I learned that there are worse things that can happen to you on your anniversary than forgetting to buy a gift.  So, take note, gentlemen.

Now, win or lose, this is my last political campaign. So I'm trying to drink it all in. Unfortunately, Mayor Bloomberg will only let me have 16 ounces of it.  That's okay, I'm still making the most of my time in the city. Earlier today, I went shopping at some stores in Midtown. I understand Governor Romney went shopping for some stores in Midtown. 

And it brought back some great memories because, some of you know, I went to school here in New York, had a wonderful experience here.  Used to love walking through Central Park, loved to go to old Yankee Stadium, the house that Ruth built although he really did not build that.  I hope everybody is aware of that. 

It's been four years since I was last at the Al Smith Dinner. And I have to admit some things have changed since then. I've heard some people say, "Barack, you're not as young as you used to be. Where's that golden smile? Where's that pep in your step?" And I say, "Settle down, Joe, I'm trying to run a Cabinet meeting."  He does smile when he says it, though. 

Tomorrow it's back to campaigning. I visit cities and towns across our great country, and I hear the same thing everywhere I go honestly, we were hoping to see Michelle.  And I have to admit it can be a grind. Sometimes it feels like this race has dragged on forever. But Paul Ryan assured me that we've only been running for two hours and 50-something minutes. 

Of course, the economy is on everybody's minds. The unemployment rate is at its lowest level since I took office. I don't have a joke here. I just thought it would be useful to remind everybody that the unemployment rate is at the lowest it's been since I took office. 

And we're getting to that time when folks are making up their minds. Just the other day, Honey Boo Boo endorsed me.  So that's a big relief.

Ultimately, though, tonight is not about the disagreements Governor Romney and I may have. It's what we have in common beginning with our unusual names. Actually, Mitt is his middle name. I wish I could use my middle name. 

And even though we're enjoying ourselves tonight, we're both thinking ahead to our final debate on Monday. I'm hoping that Governor Romney and I will have a chance to answer the question that is on the minds of millions of Americans watching at home: Is this happening again?  Why aren't they putting on The Voice? 

Monday's debate is a little bit different because the topic is foreign policy. Spoiler alert: We got bin Laden.  Of course, world affairs are a challenge for every candidate. After some of you guys remember, after my foreign trip in 2008, I was attacked as a celebrity because I was so popular with our allies overseas. And I have to say, I'm impressed with how well Governor Romney has avoided that problem. 

Now, just so everyone knows, in our third debate we won't spend a whole lot of time interrupting each other. We will also interrupt the moderator, just to mix things up. 

And finally, let me say that I've been doing some thinking, and I've decided that for our final debate I'm going to go back to the strategy I used to prepare for the first debate.  I'm just kidding I'm trying to make Axelrod sweat a little bit.  Get him a little nervous. 

In all seriousness, I couldn't be more honored to be here this evening. I'm honored to be with leaders of both the private and public sectors, and particularly the extraordinary work that is done by the Catholic Church. 

It's written in Scripture that tribulation produces perseverance; and perseverance, character; and character, hope. This country has fought through some very tough years together, and while we still have a lot of work ahead, we've come as far as we have mainly because of the perseverance and character of ordinary Americans. And it says something about who we are as a people that in the middle of a contentious election season, opposing candidates can share the same stage; people from both
parties can come together come together to support a worthy cause.

And I particularly want to thank Governor Romney for joining me, because I admire him very much as a family man and a loving father, and those are two titles that will always matter more than any political ones. 

So we may have different political perspectives, but I think in fact, I'm certain that we share the hope that the next four years will reflect the same decency and the same willingness to come together for a higher purpose that are on display this evening. May we all, in the words of Al Smith, do our full duty as citizens.

God bless you. God bless your families. And may God bless the United States of America. Thank you very much. 


Tonight, more than 200 years after a former colony won the right to determine its own destiny, the task of perfecting our union moves forward. 

It moves forward because of you. It moves forward because you reaffirmed the spirit that has triumphed over war and depression, the spirit that has lifted this country from the depths of despair to the great heights of hope, the belief that while each of us will pursue our own individual dreams, we are an American family, and we rise or fall together as one nation and as one people. 

Tonight, in this election, you, the American people, reminded us that while our road has been hard, while our journey has been long, we have picked ourselves up, we have fought our way back, and we know in our hearts that for the United States of America, the best is yet to come.

I want to thank every American who participated in this election. Whether you voted for the very first time or waited in line for a very long time by the way, we have to fix that. Whether you pounded the pavement or picked up the phone whether you held an Obama sign or a Romney sign, you made your voice heard and you made a difference. 

I just spoke with Governor Romney and I congratulated him and Paul Ryan on a hard-fought campaign.  We may have battled fiercely, but it's only because we love this country deeply and we care so strongly about its future. From George to Lenore to their son Mitt, the Romney family has chosen to give back to America through public service. And that is a legacy that we honor and applaud tonight.  In the weeks ahead, I also look forward to sitting down
with Governor Romney to talk about where we can work together to move this country forward. 

I want to thank my friend and partner of the last four years, America's happy warrior, the best vice president anybody could ever hope for, Joe Biden. 

And I wouldn't be the man I am today without the woman who agreed to marry me 20 years ago.  Let me say this publicly. Michelle, I have never loved you more.  I have never been prouder to watch the rest of America fall in love with you too as our nation's first lady.  Sasha and Malia before our very eyes, you're growing up to become two strong, smart, beautiful young women, just like your mom.
And I am so proud of you guys. But I will say that for now, one dog's probably enough.

To the best campaign team and volunteers in the history of politics the best the best ever some of you were new this time around, and some of you have been at my side since the very beginning. 

But all of you are family. No matter what you do or where you go from here, you will carry the memory of the history we made together.  And you will have the lifelong appreciation of a grateful president. Thank you for believing all the way to every hill, to every valley.  You lifted me up the whole day, and I will always be grateful for everything that you've done and all the incredible work that you've put in. 

I know that political campaigns can sometimes seem small, even silly. And that provides plenty of fodder for the cynics who tell us that politics is nothing more than a contest of egos or the domain of special interests. But if you ever get the chance to talk to folks who turned out at our rallies and crowded along a rope line in a high school gym or or saw folks working late at a campaign office in some tiny county far away from home, you'll discover something else.

You'll hear the determination in the voice of a young field organizer who's working his way through college and wants to make sure every child has that same opportunity.  You'll hear the pride in the voice of a volunteer who's going door to door because her brother was finally hired when the local auto plant added another shift. 

You'll hear the deep patriotism in the voice of a military spouse who's working the phones late at night to make sure that no one who fights for this country ever has to fight for a job or a roof over their head when they come home. 

That's why we do this. That's what politics can be. That's why elections matter. It's not small, it's big. It's important. Democracy in a nation of 300 million can be noisy and messy and complicated. We have our own opinions. Each of us has deeply held beliefs. And when we go through tough times, when we make big decisions as a country, it necessarily stirs passions, stirs up controversy. That won't change after tonight. And it shouldn't. These arguments we have are a mark of our liberty,
and we can never forget that as we speak, people in distant nations are risking their lives right now just for a chance to argue about the issues that matter the chance to cast their ballots like we did today.

But despite all our differences, most of us share certain hopes for America's future.

We want our kids to grow up in a country where they have access to the best schools and the best teachers a country that lives up to its legacy as the global leader in technology and discovery and innovation with all of the good jobs and new businesses that follow. We want our children to live in an America that isn't burdened by debt, that isn't weakened up by inequality, that isn't threatened by the destructive power of a warming
planet. We want to pass on a country that's safe and respected and admired around the world, a nation that is defended by the strongest military on earth and the best troops this world has ever known but also a country that moves with confidence beyond this time of war to shape a peace that is built on the promise of freedom and dignity for every human being.

We believe in a generous America, in a compassionate America, in a tolerant America open to the dreams of an immigrant's daughter who studies in our schools and pledges to our flag to the young boy on the south side of Chicago who sees a life beyond the nearest street corner to the furniture worker's child in North Carolina who wants to become a doctor or a scientist, an engineer or an entrepreneur, a diplomat or even a president.

That's the that's the future we hope for. That's the vision we share. That's where we need to go forward. That's where we need to go. 

Now, we will disagree, sometimes fiercely, about how to get there. As it has for more than two centuries, progress will come in fits and starts. It's not always a straight line. It's not always a smooth path. By itself, the recognition that we have common hopes and dreams won't end all the gridlock, resolve all our problems or substitute for the painstaking work of building consensus and making the difficult compromises needed to move this country forward.

But that common bond is where we must begin. Our economy is recovering. A decade of war is ending.  A long campaign is now over.  And whether I earned your vote or not, I have listened to you. I have learned from you. And you've made me a better president. And with your stories and your struggles, I return to the White House more determined and more inspired than ever about the work there is to do and the future that lies ahead. 

Tonight you voted for action, not politics as usual.  You elected us to focus on your jobs, not ours. And in the coming weeks and months, I am looking forward to reaching out and working with leaders of both parties to meet the challenges we can only solve together reducing our deficit, reforming out tax code, fixing our immigration system, freeing ourselves from foreign oil. We've got more work to do. 

But that doesn't mean your work is done. The role of citizens in our democracy does not end with your vote.

America's never been about what can be done for us; it's about what can be done by us together, through the hard and frustrating but necessary work of self- government.  That's the principle we were founded on.

This country has more wealth than any nation, but that's not what makes us rich. We have the most powerful military in history, but that's not what makes us strong. Our university, our culture are all the envy of the world, but that's not what keeps the world coming to our shores. What makes America exceptional are the bonds that hold together the most diverse nation on Earth, the belief that our destiny is shared that this country only works when we accept
certain obligations to one another and to future generations, so that the freedom which so many Americans have fought for and died for come with responsibilities as well as rights, and among those are love and charity and duty and patriotism. That's what makes America great. 

I am hopeful tonight because I have seen this spirit at work in America. I've seen it in the family business whose owners would rather cut their own pay than lay off their neighbors and in the workers who would rather cut back their hours than see a friend lose a job. I've seen it in the soldiers who re-enlist after losing a limb and in those SEALs who charged up the stairs into darkness and danger because they knew there was a buddy behind them watching their back. 
I've seen it on the shores of New Jersey and New York, where leaders from every party and level of government have swept aside their differences to help a community rebuild from the wreckage of a terrible storm. 

And I saw it just the other day in Mentor, Ohio, where a father told the story of his 8-year-old daughter whose long battle with leukemia nearly cost their family everything had it not been for health care reform passing just a few months before the insurance company was about to stop paying for her care.  I had an opportunity to not just talk to the father but meet this incredible daughter of his. And when he spoke to the crowd, listening to that father's
story, every parent in that room had tears in their eyes because we knew that little girl could be our own.

And I know that every American wants her future to be just as bright. That's who we are. That's the country I'm so proud to lead as your president. 

And tonight, despite all the hardship we've been through, despite all the frustrations of Washington, I've never been more hopeful about our future.  I have never been more hopeful about America. And I ask you to sustain that hope.

I'm not talking about blind optimism, the kind of hope that just ignores the enormity of the tasks ahead or the road blocks that stand in our path. I'm not talking about the wishful idealism that allows us to just sit on the sidelines or shirk from a fight. I have always believed that hope is that stubborn thing inside us that insists, despite all the evidence to the contrary, that something better awaits us so long as we have the courage to keep reaching, to keep working, to keep
fighting. 

America, I believe we can build on the progress we've made and continue to fight for new jobs and new opportunities and new security for the middle class. I believe we can keep the promise of our founding, the idea that if you're willing to work hard, it doesn't matter who you are or where you come from or what you look like or where you love . It doesn't matter whether you're black or white or Hispanic or Asian or Native American or young or old or rich or poor, abled, disabled,
gay or straight.  You can make it here in America if you're willing to try. 

Thank you. Thank you. Thank you so much. 

I believe we can seize this future together because we are not as divided as our politics suggests. We're not as cynical as the pundits believe. We are greater than the sum of our individual ambitions and we remain more than a collection of red states and blue states. We are, and forever will be, the United States of America. 

And together, with your help and God's grace, we will continue our journey forward and remind the world just why it is that we live in the greatest nation on earth.  Thank you, America.  God bless you. God bless these United States. 
 Can everybody please give Cecile a big round of applause for the great introduction and the work she does.  We've got your Congressman here Gerry Connolly in the house. 

Eighteen days. Eighteen days, Virginia. Eighteen days and you're going to step into a voting booth. And you're going to have a very big choice to make not just a choice between two candidates or two parties, but between two fundamentally different visions for this country that we love.

Governor Romney has got his sales pitch. We heard it the other night at the debate. He's been running around talking about his five-point plan for the economy.

He wants you to believe that somehow he'll create 12 million jobs, cut taxes by $5 trillion, even though it favors the wealthiest Americans. None of this will add to the deficit.

When folks who don't actually work for Governor Romney start crunching the numbers, it turns out the tax plan doesn't add up, jobs plan doesn't create jobs, deficit plan doesn't reduce the deficit. An economist at the New York Times put it this morning, "There's no jobs plan there's just a snow job on the American people."  A snow job.

Virginia, you've heard of the New Deal, you've heard of the Square Deal, the Fair Deal. Mitt Romney is trying to give you a Sketchy Deal.  A sketchy deal.

And it's really just a one-point plan, not a five-point plan. One point folks at the very top play by a different set of rules than all of you.

If he offered you that deal when he was in corporate finance, you wouldn't give him a dime. So why would you give him his vote?

This same philosophy that's been squeezing the middle-class family for more than a decade the same philosophy that got us into this mess. We can't go back to that.

 I've met too many good Americans who work so hard, show so much resilience, so much resolve we have been fighting our way back from some of the same policies he's advocating. We have been there. We have tried it. We can't go back.  We are moving forward. And that's why I'm running for a second term as President of the United States. 

Now, I believe that the biggest issue in this election is how do we rebuild a strong middle class and provide ladders for opportunity all those who want to get into the middle class, who are willing to work hard, willing to take responsibility. Are we going to make sure that we're a country where everybody gets a fair shot, and everybody is doing their fair share, and everybody is playing by the same rules? 

So the economy is the dominant issue. But I want everybody to understand that that's not the only place where Governor Romney is offering you a sketchy deal. It's bad enough that my opponent wants to take us back to the failed economic policies of the past. But when it comes to issues critical to women the right to make your own decision about your health the right to be treated fairly and equally in the workplace.  Governor Romney wants to take us to
policies more suited to the 1950s. Even his own running mate said he's "kind of a throwback to the '50s." That's one thing we agree on. 

He may not have noticed, we're in the 21st century.  And in the 21st century, a woman deserves equal pay for equal work.  This should be a no-brainer. But no matter how many times Governor Romney is asked whether or not he supports a law upholding that idea, he refuses to say. Why should this be hard? Are you for equal pay for equal work? Are you for making sure that laws enforce that basic principle?

He can't tell you. I can.  I support that law. In fact, the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act was the first law that I signed into office.  And this isn't just a women's issue. No man should want his wife, or his daughters paid less than a man for doing the same job.  This is a family issue. This is an economic issue. It's one that we've got to fight for.

When Governor Romney says he's going to get rid of funding for Planned Parenthood 

What he apparently doesn't understand is that there are millions of women all across the country who rely on Planned Parenthood not just for contraceptive care, but for preventive care. That's not just a health issue, it's an economic issue.

When Governor Romney said he'd have supported an extreme measure in Massachusetts that could have outlawed some forms of contraception, when he joined the far right of his party to support a bill that would have allowed any employer to deny contraceptive care to their employees 

What he didn't get is that making sure your insurance policy covers contraceptive care is an economic issue also. I don't think your boss should decide what's best for your health and safety.

 I don't think your insurance company gets to decide what care you should get.

 And I sure don't think any politician should decide.  The only person who should decide about your health care is you. 

And, by the way, that's why we fought so hard to pass health care reform, a.k.a. Obamacare. That's why we pushed for it. 

This law has secured new access to preventive care like mammograms and other cancer screenings for more than 20 million women, with no co-pay, no deductible, no out-of-pocket cost, because I do not believe a working mother should have to put off a mammogram just because money is tight. 

This law means that most health plans are now beginning to cover the cost of contraceptive care because I don't think a college student in Charlottesville or Blacksburg or Fairfax should have to choose between textbooks or the preventive care that she needs. 

And, by the way for all the young people out here, Obamacare has already allowed nearly 7 million young adults under the age of 26 to sign up to stay on their parent's plans. 

For all those who are young at heart but not young in years, it's already saved millions of seniors on Medicare hundreds of dollars on their prescription medicine. 

Insurance companies can no longer put lifetime limits on your care or discriminate against children with preexisting conditions.  And soon, they'll no longer be able to charge women more for the same care just because they're women. That's what change looks like. 

 Thank you. 

Now, anybody who thinks that this election doesn't matter, know this: My opponent has promised to repeal all of the things we just talked about as soon as he takes office, says he'd do it on day one. We know full well that if he gets the chance, he'll rubber-stamp the agenda of this Republican Congress the second he takes office. Virginia, we can't give him that chance.


 I know he's called him severely he's called himself "severely conservative," but there's nothing conservative about a government that prevents a woman from making her own health care decisions.

He talks about freedom, but freedom is the ability to choose the care you need when you need it. Freedom is the ability to change jobs or start your own business without the fear of losing your health insurance. Freedom is the knowledge that you'll no longer be charged more than men for the same health care, or denied affordable coverage just because you beat cancer.

When the next President and Congress could tip the balance of the highest court in the land in a way that turns back the clock for women and families for decades to come, you don't want someone who needs to ask for binders of women.  You don't want that guy. You want a President who has already appointed two unbelievable women to the Supreme Court of the United States. 

So, Virginia, the choice 


 The choice between going backward and moving forward has never been so clear. But now that we're 18 days out from the election, Mr. "Severely Conservative" wants you to think he was severely kidding about everything he said over the last year.  He told folks he was "the ideal candidate" for the Tea Party. Now suddenly he's saying, "what, who, me?"  He's forgetting what his own positions are, and he's betting that you will, too.

I mean, he's changing up so much and backtracking and sidestepping we've got to name this condition that he's going through. I think it's called "Romnesia."  That's what it's called. I think that's what he's going through.

Now, I'm not a medical doctor, but I do want to go over some of the symptoms with you because I want to make sure nobody else catches it.  If you say you're for equal pay for equal work, but you keep refusing to say whether or not you'd sign a bill that protects equal pay for equal work you might have Romnesia. 

If you say women should have access to contraceptive care, but you support legislation that would let your employer deny you contraceptive care - you might have a case of Romnesia. 

If you say you'll protect a woman's right to choose, but you stand up at a primary debate and said that you'd be delighted to sign a law outlying outlawing that right to choose in all cases - man, you've definitely got Romnesia. 

Now, this extends to other issues. If you say earlier in the year, I'm going to give a tax cut to the top 1 percent and then in a debate you say, I don't know anything about giving tax cuts to rich folks you need to get a thermometer, take your temperature, because you've probably got Romnesia. 

If you say that you're a champion of the coal industry when, while you were governor you stood in front of a coal plant and said, this plant will kill you 


 Four years ago, I told you we'd end the war in Iraq, and we did.  I said we'd end the war in Afghanistan we are. I said we'd refocus on the terrorists who actually attacked us on 9/11, and we have.  Al Qaeda is on the path to defeat. Osama bin Laden is dead. 

Four years ago, I promised to cut taxes for middle-class families, and I have.  I promised to cut taxes for small business owners we have, 18 times. 

We got every dime back from the banks that we used to rescue those banks. We passed laws to end taxpayer-funded Wall Street bailouts for good.

We repealed "don't ask, don't tell," to make sure that nobody who wants to serve our country gets kicked out because of who they love. 

When Governor Romney said we'd let he'd let Detroit go bankrupt, we said, we're not going to take your advice. We reinvented a dying auto industry that's come roaring back to the top of the world. 

Four years after the worst economic crisis of our lifetime, we're moving. After losing 800,000 jobs a month when I took office, businesses have now added over 5 million new jobs. Unemployment has fallen from 10 percent to 7.8 percent. Home values are back on the rise.  The stock market has nearly doubled 401s are starting to recover. Manufacturing is coming home. Assembly lines are humming again. We've got to keep moving forward. We've got to keep moving forward.


We've got more work to do. I've got a plan and it's a real plan, not a sales pitch to grow the economy and create jobs and build more security for the middle class.

I want to send fewer jobs overseas and sell more products overseas.  I want to invest in manufacturers and small businesses that create jobs right here in Virginia, right here in America.

I want us to control more of our own energy, cut oil imports in half, create thousands of clean energy jobs.

I want every child to have the same chance at a great education that Michelle and I received.  I want to hire more teachers in math and science, train 2 million workers at community colleges, bring down the cost of college tuition. 

I want to use the savings from ending the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan to pay down our deficit, put our people back to work right here, doing some nation-building here at home. 

That's the agenda you need. That's the agenda we need. That's how we strengthen the middle class. That's how we'll keep moving forward. And in 18 days, you're going to have a chance to say whether we keep moving forward.

In 18 days, you can choose between top-down economic policies that got us into this mess, or the middle class-out policies that are getting us out of this mess. 

In 18 days, you can choose a foreign policy that gets us into wars with no plan to get out, or you can say let's end the Afghan war responsibly; let's bring our troops home.  Let's focus on making sure that we're building America.

In 18 days, you can let them turn back the clock 50 years for immigrants, and gays, and women, or we can stand up and say we are a country in which everybody has a place.  A country where no matter where you are, no matter what you look like, no matter where you come from black, white, Hispanic, Asian, Native American, young, old, gay, straight, abled, disabled we have a place for everybody.  Everybody has got a chance to make it if you try.

That's what's at stake, Virginia. That's why I'm asking for your vote. I believe in you. I need you to keep believing in me. I want to finish the job. And if you're willing to stand with me, and make some phone calls with me, and knock on some doors with, get your friends to vote for me we will win Fairfax County again. We will win Virginia again.  We'll finish what we started. And we'll remind the world why the United States of America is the greatest nation on Earth.

God bless you. God bless the United States of America. 
